The city in which Dashiell Hammett’s The Glass Key takes place is without a name.

One of the constitutional elements of any story is a setting, but in The Glass Key, it is impossible to identify one. 

The fact that there is no mention of place is extremely mysterious, and there must be a reason for this fundamental component to be omitted.




To begin to understand the purpose of Hammet excluding a setting in his novel, one must first understand what the general purpose of a setting is in literature. 

Fundamentally, a setting establishes context for the plot. 

Settings establish a variety of atmospheres where the plot takes place, heavily affecting the reader’s understanding of the story. 

The setting works alongside the other fundamental elements to the story to articulate the story in a precise way.  

When the reader is allowed to understand where and when their story’s characters are interacting, they are able to visualize the plot in a specific way. 

In a detective literature, the setting can go beyond establishing context by sometimes providing clues for the reader to solve the crime ahead of the detective.





In The Glass Key, the story is mentioned as taking place during the Prohibition era; however, the place is never set. 

The purpose of omitting a setting becomes more perplexing after considering the importance and usefulness of having one.

New York is mentioned several times, and it is clear that it is somewhat close to where the novel primarily takes place. 

By naming a relatively nearby city and not the city where the the novel is set is once again awfully unusual.

There are a handful of specific settings within the novel: the Hospital and the Mathew's House to name a couple. 

The general setting, though, is unknown, 

In a story like The Glass Key where the city’s government and its residents are heavily discussed, the general setting plays a large part in the reader’s comprehension of the story. 

For example, the government of large city like Los Angeles casts an extremely different image compared to that of a small town like Claremont, California. 

Many will say that a large city like Los Angeles might have a relatively bureaucratic government: one that is inefficient due to its ridgid following of rules and regulations. 

On the other hand, a city like Claremont, California may be more lenient; they may allow certain initiatives that a big government couldn’t consider. 

These are just some of the implications from having a novel discussing the government of Los Angeles versus having one discussing the government of Claremont, California. 





In The Glass Key, the government is discussed a great deal.

Without providing a setting for the novel, the reader is unable to make judgements on organizations like the government from the city in which the novel is taking place. 

Although not having a setting raises questions for the reader, it also standardizes the reader’s original assumptions. 

The implications of having a setting in the novel would create biases that vary from reader to reader.

Because readers may have had varied experiences with the same setting or city, they may have varied views on the same setting without even considering the novel.

For example, one reader may believe that a particular setting is extremely prone to corruption in government while another reader may believe that the exact same setting is not. 

By not providing a setting, it effectively forces the reader to use their previous experiences with time and place to interpret the novel.

This makes each reader’s comprehension of the novel unique. 

Each reader will become more invested with the novel because their interpretation is unique to them. 

If reader is forced to follow a novel in which they are unable to understand the setting of, they will certainly not be interested or engaged with it. 

On the other hand, if the reader is forced to insert their previous experiences with place into the novel, they will be significantly become more engaged with it because of its familiarity.

Hammett clearly did not want his readers to have presumptions based on the setting of the novel, and therefore did not provide a specific setting for the story. 

By doing so, the reader effectively becomes more engaged with the story because they aren’t forced to comprehend a setting they are unfamiliar with.  





In addition to Hammett’s desire to standardize assumptions based on setting, there is another reason the city in which The Glass Key takes place s omitted. 